# Expedia-Reservation-Big-Data-Aalysis


REPORT – EXPEDIA PROJECT

The goal of our project was to determine any interesting pattern and trend by looking at the data of the Expedia website and to build a model in order to predict the likelihood of a user to book a stay in a certain hotel.  

Descriptive 

From a general analysis of the data it emerged that there is a positive trend in the number of sales and searches made on Expedia. The number of searches on the website - of which still a small percentage is made by mobile - has doubled from 2013 to 2014, as also the number of sales for the same period - with almost a quarter of bookings generated as a part of a package. However, the conversion rate is still very low (around 8%). This means that there is a large room for growing the sales’ level even further. A market research should be firstly conducted in order to understand the reasons that stop customers from booking on Expedia. In addition to this - in order to push customers to buy - Expedia should offer more promotions on its website, trying in particular to take advantage of the peak periods within the searches (March, July and December). These online promotions should come along with other promotions on the marketing channel n.9 - which resulted to be as the most effective in driving customers to Expedia - and with offline advertising, in particular in those countries where the company is more popular (e.g. countries 66, 205 and 3). 

Moving the analysis to a deeper level (i.e. by separating the results on the basis of the different target groups, namely “Business” and “Leisure” travellers), more specific and interesting trends have emerged. In particular, although most of Expedia’s searches have been made by leisure travelers (around the 82%, considering both 2013 and 2014), data show that a booking is more likely to be made by a business traveler. There is, indeed, a considerable difference between the conversion rates of business and leisure travelers which resulted to be respectively equal to 12,05% and 7,09%. This can probably be explained by the fact that business travelers have a more prompt need to make a reservation due to their work schedules, whereas leisure travelers may not be as likely as them to make a booking right after a search if there is not an accommodation they are satisfied with. In addition to this, leisure travelers are more likely to make hotel bookings as part of a package with a flight, probably because they try to find better deals - differently from businesses who have less flexible schedules and need to get a booking for a specific date. Therefore, it would be in Expedia’s best interest to try to attract more business travelers, since they are probably less price sensitive and the company can extract more value from them.

The different needs of the different target groups can be demonstrated also by their reservation behavior. Businesses on average look for a room about one week before their check-in date and have an average stay slightly more higher than 2 days. On the contrary, leisure travelers search for a room more than 2 months in advance to the check-in date and tend to stay 4 days on average in a hotel. 
Not big differences emerged, instead, both for the effectiveness of the marketing channels (n.9 resulted in general to be the best one) and for the use of mobile for searches (roughly equal to 13% for both the targets - thing that was surprising, since we expected business travelers to be more inclined to use mobile devices to conduct searches on the go).  

To understand traffic between any two locations, we considered sources as one set of nodes and destinations as the other and performed network analysis. We were particularly interested in finding out the central nodes in the network. We assumed that the central nodes refer to the most searched destinations. Also, we filtered the most popular destinations, ie, the most searched destinations. Then we focused on conversion rate. Conversion rate refers to the percentage of searches that were bookings. In addition, we analyzed how the conversion rates changed between 2013 and 2014 when compared to the number of searches. We also analyzed the number of bookings that were made as complete packages(flight + hotel). To understand this in context, we calculated a ‘package rate’ for the popular destinations. Through the data extracted, we were able to analyze to network to find the best and the worst destinations in terms of ‘conversion rate’ and ‘package rate’. 

Tableau Visualization: We created Tableau visualizations using raw data generated for 2013 and 2014 bookings with following fields: Year, Source, Destination, Searches, Bookings, Conversion_Rate, Package_Rate
For the analysis part, we decided to use treemaps visualization in Tableau:
Visualization 1:  Package Rate by destination: 
Each Tree Block represents unique combination of source and destination. These tree blocks are grouped together by destination. Size of each block is based on average number of bookings per year. Blocks are colored based on Average Package Rate for that combination of source and destination, green represents better than avg package rate & red represents lower than avg package rate.
Business Implication: Destination block which are predominantly green (e.g. destination 8791) are package destinations, so expedia should focus more on selling packages for these destinations. Similarly, expedia should focus on selling non package products for destination blocks which are predominantly red (e.g. destination id 8279).
Visualization 2: Conversion Rate by destination
Each Tree Block represents unique combination of source and destination. These tree blocks are grouped together by destination. Size of each block is based on average number of bookings per year. Blocks are colored based on Average conversion rate for that combination of source and destination, green represents better than 10% & red represents lower than 10%.
Business Implication: Destination block which are predominantly green (e.g. destination 8228) have excellent conversion rates, so expedia can try to make better margins for these destinations. Similarly, expedia should focus more on marketing for destination blocks which are predominantly red (e.g. destination id 8267).

Predictive
For running the prediction model, we made some assumptions which made it possible for us to simplify the source/destination data. For example, we analyzed the column ‘hotel_cluster’ and decided that this can be referred as the destination since multiple destinations are grouped into a single hotel cluster. Through clustering, we predicted which hotel cluster a new source is likely to travel to. For example, if a particular source is assigned to the cluster with ‘hotel_cluster’ as 10, then a user from that source is likely to travel to the destinations that are grouped under that particular ‘hotel_cluster’. The next challenge was to aggregate the sources to perform clustering. We came up with a standard representation for each source. We combined user_country, user_region and user_city to have a unique representation for each source that is relative to other sources in the same country of from the same region. In this way, we decided that the unique source IDs can be used for clustering without the need to create dummy variables. Hence we performed clustering analysis using these two columns, source ID and hotel cluster. Through the output, we were able to identify dyadic links between source and a group of destinations. This can be used to recommend other possible destinations for a user using expedia from a particular city. 
